lem, shilling attacks,grey-sheep problem,synonymy, as well as scalabilityand latency problems [14]. This leads to severe problems for society—from filter bubbles [18]to the reproduction and amplification of stereotypes and discrimination[22] to cognitive bias and humans’overconfidence in algorithmic results [11]. Addressing these problems, there is a growing body of literature on fairness,accountability, and transparency in machine learning and artificial intelligence [2, 7, 17].



Still, while some aspects of bias in data and algorithms are subject of interest in research and draw attention on the media(e.g.,lterbubbleand popularity ias), therbiases are not addressed or may even not have been identified yet.

### 3. THE NEGLECTED ARTIST INMUSIC INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 

In the music information retrieval (MIR) community (and related communities), research on diversity typically takes the perspective of the system—for instance, to mitigate the cold-start problem[4]—or the user(here: music consumer)—to better meet user preferences [13, 26]. The perspective of the item suppliers is considered only occasionally. For instance, Reference [1] raise awareness that recommender systems in multi-stakeholder environments may be fair for one stakeholder while being unfair for other stakeholders. Reference[8] proposes an approach with the goal to provide all artists in a collection with the opportunityof being listened in recommendations. Taking a human-centric approach to MIR systems, the goal is to include the artists' perspective in MIR research.

### 4. RESEARCH DIRECTIONS 

Taking a human-centric perspective with the aim to allow for equal opportunity for artists and promoting diversity in music consumption, requires to address fundamental research questions concerning potential bias in current systems and, generally, in music consumption. For instance:

Research Question 1. How is diversity in terms of, for example, age, disability, gender, ethnic origin, religion, or sexual orientation of artists represented in the long tail of the popularity distribution?

How is diversity represented in the short head of popular artists?

How does the diversity in the long tail and the short head relate to each other, and to the entire population?

Research Question 2. How does the popularity of music items reflect inherent user taste?

How is the popularity of music items affected by what is offered on online music platforms, on playlist, in recommendations, in advertising, etc.?



Understanding bias is a prerequisite to address its various facets and mitigate them. One concrete research question could be formulated as follows:

Research Question 3. What is the influence of using timbre of the singing voice for music recommendation on 

the artist gender distribution in recommended items?If recommendations allow for little diversity in timbre,items will likely be sung by same-gender singers.

Overall, the goal of future work is to investigate the various facets reasons that hinder equal opportunity and diversity in music recommendation. A deep understanding of the biases and inequalities is the essential basis to design approaches for music recommendation that provide reasonable opportunities for artists—for (currently) popular artists and artists in the long-tail alike.

### 5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This research is supported by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF): V579.



### 6. REFERENCES 

[1] Himan Abdollahpouri and Robin Burke. Multistakeholder recommendation and its connection to multi-sidedfairness. In Robin Burke, Himan Abdollahpouri, Edward Malthouse, KP Thai, and Yongfeng Zhang, editors, Proceedings of the Workshop on Recommendation in Multistakeholder Environments (RMSE2019), number 2440 inCEUR Workshop Proceedings, Aachen, Germany, 2019. http://ceurws.org/Vol-2440/paper3 .pdf.
[2] Ashraf Abdul, Jo Vermeulen, Danding Wang, Brian Y.
Lim, and Mohan Kankanhalli. Trends and trajectories for explainable, accountable and intelligible systems:
An hci research agenda. In 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI'18, New York, NY, USA, 2018. ACM.
3] Pauwke BerkersandJulian Schaap.Genderinequality in metal music production. Emerald Studies in Metal Music and Culture, pages 145–149,2018.[4] K. R. Bindu, Rhama LalgudiVisweswaran, P. C.
Sachin, Kundavai Devi Solai, andSoundarya Gunasekaran. Reducing the cold-user and cold-item problem in recommender system by reducing the sparsity of the sparse matrix and addressing the diversityaccuracy problem. In Nilesh Modi, Pramode Verma,
and Bhushan Trivedi, editors, Proceedings of International Conference on Communication and Networks,
pages 561–570, Singapore, 2017. Springer.[5]Keith Bradley and Barry Smyth. Improving recommendation diversity. In Proceedings of the 12th National Conference in Artificial Intelligence and Cognitive Science, AICS'01, pages 75-84,2001.[6]Jinpeng Chen, Yu Liu, Jun Hu, Wei He, and Deyi Li.
A novel framework for improving recommender diversity. In Behavior and Social Computing, pages 129–
138, Cham, Germany, 2013. Springer.[7]Amitai Etzioni and Oren Etzioni. Incorporating ethics into artificial intelligence. The Journal of_Ethics,
21(4):403–418, 2017.
