[8] Andres Ferraro. Music cold-start and long-tail recommendation: Bias in deep representations. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, RecSys'19, pages 586-590, New York, NY,USA, 2019. ACM.
[9] Bruce Ferwerda, Mark P. Graus, Andreu Vall, Marko Tkalcic, and Markus Schedl. How item discovery enabled by diversity leads to increased recommendation list attractiveness. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Applied Computing, SAC'17, pages 1693-1696, New York, NY, USA, 2017. ACM.
[10] BruceFerwerda,AndreuVall,Marko Tkalcic,and Markus Schedl. Exploring music diversity needs across countries. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on User Modeling Adaptation and Personalization,
UMAP'16, pages 287–288, New York, NY, USA,
2016. ACM.
[11] George Hurlburt. How much to trustartificial intelligence? IT Professional, 19(4):7–11, 2017.[12] Dietmar Janach, LukasLrche,Fatih Gdikli, and Geoffray Bonnin. What recommenders recommend: An analysis of accuracy, popularity, and sales diversity effects. In 21st International Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation, and Personalization, UMAP'13,
pages 25-37, Berlin Heidelberg, Germany, 2013.
Springer.
[13] Yucheng Jin, Nava Tintarev, and Katrien Verbert. Effects of individual traits on diversity-aware music recommender user interfaces. In Proceedings of the 26th Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization, UMAP'18, pages 291–299, New York, NY,
USA, 2018. ACM.
[14]Shah Khusro, Zafar Ali, andIrfanUllah. Recommender systems: Issues, challenges, and research opportunities. InInformation Science and Applications, ICISA'16, pages 1179–1189, Singapore, 2016.
Springer.
[15]]Matevž Kunaver and Tomaž Požrl. Diversity in recommender systems: A survey. Knowledge-Based Systems,
123:154–162, 2017.
[16] Naomi Larsson. Live music acts are mostly male-only.
what's holding women back? The Guardian, October 2017. https://www.theguardian.com/inequality/2017/
oct/12/tonights-live-music-acts-will-mostly-be-maleonly-whats-holding-women-back.
[17]Bruno Lepri, Nuria Oliver, Emmanuel Letouzé, Alex Pentland, and Patrick Vinck. Fair, transparent, and accountable algorithmic decision-making processes. Philosophy & Technology, 31(4):611-627,2018.[18]Eli Pariser. The Filter Bubble: What the Internet Is Hiding from You. Penguin Group, London, United Kingdom, 2011.


[19] Vaughn Schmutz and Alison Faupel. Gender and cultural consecration in popular music. Social Forces,89(2):685–707, 2010.
[20]] Stacy L. Smith, Marc Choueiti, and Katherine Pieper. Inclusion in therecording studio?:Gender and race/ethnicity of artists, songwriters &
 producers across 600 popular songs from 2012–
2017. Report, Annenberg Inclusion Initiative, 2018.
http://assets.uscannenberg.org/docs/inclusion-in-therecording-studio.pdf.
[21] Nava Tintarev, Matt Dennis,and Judith Masthoff.
Adapting recommendation diversity to openness to experience: A study of human behaviour. In Sandra Carberry, Stephan Weibelzahl, Alessandro Micarelli, and Giovanni Semeraro, editors, User Modeling, Adaptation, and Personalization, UMAP'13, pages 190–202,
Berlin Heidelberg, Germany, 2013. Springer.[22] Nicol Turner Lee. Detecting racial bias in algorithms and machine learning. Journal of Information, Communication and Ethics in Society, 16(3):252–260,
2018.
[23]Saúl Vargas and Pablo Castells. Rank andrelevance in novelty and diversity metrics for recommender systems. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, RecSys'11, pages 109–116,
New York, NY, USA, 2011. ACM.
[24]Yixue Wang and Emöke-Ágnes HorvÁt. Gender differences in the global music industry: Evidence from musicbrainz and the echo nest. In Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, volume 13 of ICWSM'19, pages 517–526. AAAI,
2019.
[25] Christine T. Wolf, Haiyi Zhu, Julia Bullard, Min Kyung Lee, and Jed R. Brubaker. The changing contours of "participation" in data-driven, algorithmic ecosystems:
Challenges, tactics, and an agenda. In Companion of the 2018 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing, pages 377–384,
New York, NY, USA, 2018. ACM.
[26]Wen Wu, Li Chen, and Yu Zhao. Personalizingrecommendation diversity based on user personality. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 28(3):237–
276, August 2018.
[27]Patrizia Zanoni, Maddy Janssens, Yvonne Benschop,
and Stella Nkomo.Guest editorial: Unpacking diversity, grasping inequality: Rethinking difference through critical perspectives. Organization, 17(1):9–
29,2010.
