ConferencenAcoustispecandigalocssing(IASSP,2614–2618. IEEE.
Li, H.; Sui,M.;hao,F.;ha,.; and Wu,F.2021. Mvt: msk visionasxorX preprint arXiv:2106.04520.
Li,S.; Deng, W.;and Du, J. 2017. Reliable crowdsourcingand deep locality-vxssotote wild.In Proceedingsof theIEEEconferenceoncomputervision and pattern recognition, 2852–2861.
Ma,F.;u,.;d.1.lxo visual transformers and attentional selective fusion. IEEE Tranactions on Affective Computing.
Mollahosseini, A.; Hasani,B.; and Maoor, M.H. 2017. ffctnet:Adatabase or acial expression, valece, and arousalcomputing in the wild. IEEE Transactionson Afctive Computing10(1):18–3.She, J.; u,Y.; ,.;Wa,.,.;M,..De into ambiguity: Latent distribution mining and pairwise uncertainty estimation for facial expression recognition.In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 6248–6257.
Touvron, H. Cord, M. Douze, M.; Massa, F.; Sablayroles, A.;and Jégou,H.2021Trainindata-efficientimagetrasformers &distillatiothrougattntionInIntrationalonencon machine learning, 10347-10357. PMLR.
Wang, K.; eng, X.; Yang, J.; Lu,S.; and Qiao, Y.2020. Supressing uncertaintiesforlarge-scalefacialexpressionrecognitio.In Proceedingsof the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 6897–6906.
Xue, F.; Wang, Q.; and Guo, G. 2021. Transfer: Learning relationaware facial expression representations with transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 3601–3610.
Zhang, Y.; Wang, C.; and Deng, W. 2021. Relative uncertainty learning for facial expression recognition. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34.
Zhao, Z.; Liu, Q.; and Zhou, F. 2021. Robust lightweight facial expression recognition network with label distribution training. In Proceedingsof the AAAI conferenceonarticial intelligence, volume 35, 3510–3519.
