### 3.2 A micro-paper must be archived 

While blogging and tweeting is cheap and fast and encourages ideas to be shared, these aren't trustworthy archives. And sometimes good ideas arise in these faster, cheaper contexts that should be captured,articulated, and stored for later reference. With the existential threat of twitter disintegrating at any moment and the entirely unmaintained space of many academic blogs,it is important for some ideas to be archived [5].



While some blog maintainers may have higher standards for their longevity, url stability, dois, and records of changes, it may make sense for most to use an existing pre-print archival platform, like arXiv for ensuring trustworthiness and reliability in your readers.

### 3.3 Revisions must also be archived 

In addition to archival processes for the sake of accessing later, many archival sites (such as arXiv) also keep track of revision histories. The ephemeral and non-standardized way that individuals operate their own blogs and social media means that not only might something move or cease to exist (a findability problem) but there is also an honesty problem when contents change or update without record [7].

### 3.4 A micro-paper must be accessible 

Blogs, twitter, and mastodon have done more for disability discourse than most other media, but especially more than the dreaded PDF favored by academics. This is because text-based media online (generally in HTML or Markdown) has immense accessibility potential over PDF [1] (and paper publications). All artifacts of academic discourse,including every paper publication, should be more accessible. Due to a micro-paper's size, it is easier for authors to learn accessibility for than a full-size paper with proprietary formatting involved. This micro-paper was authored in Microsoft Word,exported as a PDF.and then conveited into HTML using pandoc.

With the push for arXiv to transition more towards accessible fomats of publication [2], I believe that trustworthy archives that are accessibility-first are near. Micro-papers will compliment this push.

### 4. Considering when a micro-paper is the write choice (pun intended)

If someone has an idea, conversation, or late-breaking work, they might consider the following questions:Why wouldn't I write a short academic paper and submit to a traditional venue?



It is time-consuming, expensive, and requires waiting for the publication cycle. It is also higher risk, in cases where the peer review process might reject it.

Why shouldn't I write a piece in a non-peer reviewed publication, like ACM Interactions?



This is also time-consuming and higher risk, because editorial interest may conflict. In addition, these often require an existing network of colleagues, invitation to contribute, or formal submission and selection process.Why shouldn 't I write a blog or twitter thread?Blogs and social media posts raise concerns about archival quality and trustworthiness. Accessing the piece later may become dificult or cumbersome. Some great ideas and discussions have been lost in time due to the ephemeral nature of these cheap and fast options.

## When is writing a micro-paper a good idea?

Notably, there is no fomal peer review for a micropaper. Our curently imagined peer review process may not make sense for all work published with the intent to push new ideas and conversations. It is even worth considering if this practice should continue at all [3, 4]

A practical use for a micro-paper may be as a preprint or early draft for an eventual short or full paper submission, position paper, or book chapter. The greatest strength of both the pre-print and short paper process is that they can invigorate scholars with new or raw ideas to see those turn into full projects. Short papers also have a core readership and opportunities to present that are not afforded to micro-papers, so for early career researchers it may be important to consider ways to use these two formats together.

For folks who simply want to get a citable idea out into the world without regard for submission and publication cycles and procedures, a micro-paper is a good choice as well.



And lastly, there may be authors with too many ideas to pursue (even when some are useful) and they are willing to admit that they won't pursue every idea that they have. A micro-paper is a way to put the idea into the discussion and let it run its course. In my case, I recognize that some problems and patterns are outside of the scope of my leverage and experience to address, such as contributions to design or behavioral domains of accessibility (when my area is strictly technical contributions).



### 5. Conclusion 

The hope is that both the procedural and systemic inaccessibility of the short paper authoring process and the citational unceitainty of blogs and social media can be addressed with the micro-paper. I hope to see early,usable ideas shared more freely and especially hope to invigorate young scholars and include historically excluded folks, such as those with disabilities, in the larger research conversation.

